---
title: Why a nu TeX?
date: 2020-03-22
slug: /why-a-nu-TeX
tags:
    - Projects
    - Typesetting
---

I'm a student with standards. Consequently, I have been doing homeworks in
LaTeX for several years now. I've worked with more formal packages such as
REVTeX, I've created class files, worked with Tikz, etc, etc. I was very happy
with the results I would always end up with. I enjoyed LaTeX a lot; it made me
feel...more *professional*.

Though, not long ago, I found myself late one night half way through a homework
when suddenly...I stopped...I took a moment to look at what I was doing, and I
thought to myself...

> *Oh my god, I **hate** this*.

Suddenly the glass shattered and I realized just how much I hated macros, how
much I hated the cryptic error messages, the lack of tracing and debugging, and
the constant researching for how to do even the simplest things. At that moment,
I finally saw LaTeX for what it truly was: outdated.

Since then, I began pondering about why this is the case. In truth, most of the
problems that LaTeX has are inherited from its nonnegotiable dependence on TeX
and, honestly, most of the issues that TeX has are attributed to its nonnegotiable
dependence on *macros*.

Macros do not constitute a proper programming language. Their usage is
ambiguous, hard to debug, and ultimately unpredictable. And while TeX may be
Turing complete, this only exaggerates the issue. Macros, being as error prone
as they are, are being used in a system that has *very little fault tolerance*.
And if that weren't bad enough, given TeX's notoriously poor error reporting
and lack of tracing, when these macros inevitably do fail they leave it to the
responsibility of the user to *infer* where in their code they made a mistake.
Given how programming standards have evolved since 1978, in today's world it
seems as if TeX is difficult *by design*.

---

I have a dream. A dream where professional typesetting is accessible to any
layman; where markup is minimal enough to be easy to type and to not create
clutter, but powerful enough to be functionally equivalent to TeX; where any
requirements for logic that can only be done in a Turing complete language is
clearly kept separate from the content and done in a fully featured programming
language; and where support for extensions, scripting, and package management
are baked in from the start.

The working title for such a dream is νTeX (not the based name, I'll admit, but
its subject to change).

---

The core mechanic of TeX's typesetting lies in its use of "boxes and glue".
When you build a paragraph in TeX, you are really building a list of boxes
which represent lines, and when you build a line you are really building a list
of boxes which represent characters. So a box in TeX is some unit where the
boxes contained within inherit formatting properties such as position.

Glue on the other hand is TeX's concept of "variable spacing" and constitute
how boxes in a single list are printed relative to one another. To see this
visually, Overleaf has a post on it
[here](https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/Articles/Boxes_and_Glue:_A_Brief,_but_Visual,_Introduction_Using_LuaTeX).

This model works exceptionally well and it is absolutely essential for any new
typesetting engine. Essentially, in TeX, documents boil down to simple acyclic
graphs of boxes and lists of boxes within them. The question that remains is
how a list of boxes within a given node is arranged when rendered. For one, it
needs to be determined whether they will be arranged vertically or
horizontally, and secondly, it needs to be determined how much "stretching and
shrinking" is allowed between subsequent boxes. Lastly, for paragraphs and
lines, it needs to be determined how these lists will be broken up so that they
can fit in their designated space.

My first intention is to better generalize this model. To that end, I'd like to
formalize a few terms (this may be temporary as the model increases scale):

A *Box*, which is a node in an acyclic graph that contains exactly one other node
and has a fixed width and height.

A *Block*, which is a node in an acyclic graph that contains a list of child
nodes. There are two types of blocks: *vertical blocks* and *horizontal
blocks*. Vertical blocks arrange their children vertically and likewise goes
for horizontal lists.

A *Character*, which is a glyph to be rendered and can only constitute leaves
in an acyclic graph.

For the sake of reducing verbosity, I will refer to boxes that contain a
vertical block as *vertical boxes* and boxes that contain a horizontal block as
*horizontal boxes*. In general I'll prefix names with "V" and "H" to indicate
their orientation (such as *vbox* as short for vertical box).

One very important feature of boxes is their (optional) ability to *multiply*.
To illustrate this operation, take the following box (shaded in grey) contained
in some vertical block:

<div
style="
background-color:#999999;
width:85%;
padding:0 10px;
height:5rem;
margin:auto;
border-radius:10px;
margin-bottom: 35px;
">
Pellentesque dapibus suscipit ligula.  Donec posuere augue in quam.  Etiam vel
tortor sodales tellus ultricies commodo.  Suspendisse potenti.  Aenean in sem
ac leo mollis blandit.  Donec neque quam, dignissim in, mollis nec, sagittis
eu, wisi.  Phasellus lacus.  Etiam laoreet quam sed arcu.  Phasellus at dui in
ligula mollis ultricies.  Integer placerat tristique nisl.  Praesent augue.
Fusce commodo.
</div>

As you can see, the paragraph contained in the box extends past the bottom
of the box. This is unfortunate. However, a solution to this problem exists;
one in which does not require the user to make any modification to their
content and without requiring the box to change size. That solution is to
multiply—or, to create a copy of itself so that the new copy can "catch" the
overflowing text:

<div
style="
background-color:#999999;
width:85%;
padding:0 10px;
height:5rem;
margin:auto;
border-radius:10px;
">
Pellentesque dapibus suscipit ligula.  Donec posuere augue in quam.  Etiam vel
tortor sodales tellus ultricies commodo.  Suspendisse potenti.  Aenean in sem
ac leo mollis blandit.  Donec neque quam, dignissim in, mollis nec, sagittis
eu, wisi.  Phasellus lacus.  Etiam laoreet quam sed arcu.  Phasellus at dui in
ligula mollis ultricies.
</div>
<div
style="
background-color:#999999;
width:85%;
padding:0 10px;
height:5rem;
margin:auto;
border-radius:10px;
">
Integer placerat tristique nisl.  Praesent augue. Fusce commodo.
</div>

Obviously, in a real typesetting engine, the contents will be split according
to some optimization algorithm such as how TeX does, but this is only for
illustration. Nonetheless, this provides a clean mechanism for "building"
repeating or common elements of a document such as paragraphs, lines, or even
entire pages.
